Text-Based Distances in Distancia
=================================

Introduction
============
When comparing two texts, it's important to account for various aspects such as word frequency, sentence structure, semantic meaning, and syntactic patterns. The **Distancia** package provides a wide range of distance measures to evaluate textual similarity and dissimilarity based on these factors. These metrics can be used for tasks like document comparison, plagiarism detection, and machine translation evaluation. 

Categories of Text-Based Distances
==================================

1. **Lexical Distances**
2. **Semantic Distances**
3. **Structural Distances**
4. **Statistical Distances**

List of Distances
=================

**Lexical Distances**
---------------------

  Lexical distances are based on the direct comparison of the words and characters in the text. These methods focus on the exact terms or sequences used and are often sensitive to spelling and grammatical variations.

1. **Bag of Words Distance**
   - Compares two texts by analyzing the frequency of words, ignoring word order but focusing on the content overlap.
2. **N-gram Distance**
   - Measures the similarity between two texts by comparing subsequences of length n (n-grams), capturing local patterns in the text.
3. **Edit Distance (Levenshtein)**
   - Calculates the minimum number of edits (insertions, deletions, substitutions) needed to transform one text into another.

**Semantic Distances**
----------------------

  Semantic distances consider the meaning of the words and sentences in the text. These methods use word embeddings or topic modeling to capture the contextual or thematic relationships between the words, allowing for a deeper understanding of the text’s meaning.

1. **Word Mover's Distance (WMD)**
   - Measures the semantic distance between two texts by finding the minimum distance words from one text need to "travel" to match words in another.
2. **FastText Distance**
   - Uses word vectors generated by the FastText model to compare texts, capturing both word morphology and meaning.
3. **BERT-Based Distance**
   - Leverages the BERT model to generate sentence embeddings, comparing the texts at a contextual, semantic level.
4. **Jensen-Shannon Divergence**
   - Measures the similarity between two probability distributions (e.g., word distributions) by symmetrizing Kullback-Leibler divergence.

**Structural Distances**
------------------------

  Structural distances evaluate how the words and sentences are organized in the text. These distances take into account sentence alignment, syntactic structures, and patterns, making them ideal for comparing translations or different versions of the same text.

1. **Smith-Waterman Algorithm**
   - Compares texts by identifying the optimal local alignments between their words or sentences, often used for sentence-level comparison.
2. **Monge-Elkan Distance**
   - A flexible method for comparing sequences by evaluating the best matches between individual components of the texts (e.g., words or phrases).
3. **BLEU Score**
   - Evaluates the similarity between two texts by comparing n-grams with a reference text, widely used for machine translation evaluation.
4. **ROUGE Score**
   - Measures the quality of summaries or translations by focusing on overlapping n-grams, word sequences, or sentence pairs.

**Statistical Distances**
-------------------------

Statistical distances measure similarity based on frequency counts, probability distributions, or shared patterns in the text. These distances are useful for identifying common terms, topic distributions, or shared stylistic features between texts.


1. **TF-IDF Distance**
   - Compares two texts based on term frequency-inverse document frequency (TF-IDF) vectors, highlighting significant terms in both texts.
2. **Cosine Similarity**
   - Measures the cosine of the angle between two TF-IDF vectors, determining the similarity of the texts based on word importance.
3. **Soft Cosine Similarity**
   - A variation of cosine similarity that takes into account the semantic similarity between words in addition to their frequency.
4. **Topic Modeling Distance (LDA, LSA)**
   - Compares texts by evaluating the distributions of latent topics inferred through methods like Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) or Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA).

Conclusion
==========
The **Distancia** package offers a comprehensive set of text-based distance measures, providing powerful tools for comparing documents, analyzing textual similarity, and evaluating translations. By categorizing distances into lexical, semantic, structural, and statistical, users can choose the most suitable method depending on the nature of their comparison task. Whether you are interested in the exact match of words or the deeper semantic relationship between texts, **Distancia** has a solution that fits your needs.
