Here’s a comprehensive list of distance measures specifically used for time series data, categorized based on their methodologies and applicability:

Basic Distance Measures
Euclidean Distance:

Measures the direct point-to-point distance between two time series of equal length.
Simple but sensitive to noise and misalignments.
Manhattan Distance (L1 Norm):

Sum of absolute differences between corresponding points.
Less sensitive to large deviations compared to Euclidean distance.
Chebyshev Distance:

Maximum absolute difference between corresponding points.
Focuses on the worst-case deviation.
Elastic Distances
These methods allow for non-linear alignment of time series, which is useful when the series have varying speeds.

Dynamic Time Warping (DTW):

Aligns two time series by warping their time axes to minimize the distance.
Handles temporal misalignments effectively.
FastDTW:

An approximate, faster version of DTW, suitable for large datasets.
Edit Distance on Real Sequences (EDR):

Considers insertions, deletions, and substitutions, similar to string edit distance.
Longest Common Subsequence (LCSS):

Measures similarity by identifying the longest subsequence common to both time series.
Allows for gaps but is sensitive to noise.
Time Warp Edit Distance (TWED):

Combines the benefits of DTW and edit distances.
Includes a penalty for time gaps.
Shape-Based Distances
These focus on comparing the overall shape or pattern of time series.

Correlation-Based Distance:

Measures dissimilarity based on the correlation between time series.
Robust to amplitude differences but not temporal shifts.
Shape-Based Dynamic Time Warping (SBD):

A variant of DTW that also incorporates shape-based similarity.
Feature-Based Distances
These extract features like trends or patterns before computing distances.

Fourier Transform Distance:

Compares the Fourier coefficients of the time series, focusing on frequency-domain differences.
Wavelet Transform Distance:

Measures differences in wavelet coefficients, capturing both time and frequency information.
Autocorrelation-Based Distance:

Computes the distance based on autocorrelation functions.
Model-Based Distances
These leverage probabilistic or statistical models to define similarity.

Markov Model Distance:

Uses the transition probabilities of a Markov model to compute distance.
Hidden Markov Model (HMM) Distance:

Computes the likelihood that one series is generated by the HMM of another.
ARIMA-Based Distance:

Compares the parameters or residuals of ARIMA models fitted to the series.
Information-Theoretic Measures
These methods are grounded in concepts from information theory.

Kullback-Leibler Divergence:

Measures how one time series probability distribution diverges from another.
Mutual Information Distance:

Assesses shared information between two time series.
Compression-Based Distance:

Measures similarity by comparing how well one series compresses using the model of another.
Other Advanced Distances
Fréchet Distance:

Measures the minimum "walking" distance between curves.
Useful for continuous time series in 2D or higher dimensions.
Hausdorff Distance:

Measures how far two subsets of a metric space are from each other.
Pearson or Cosine Similarity (as Distance):

Converts similarity measures into distances for clustering or classification.
Elastic Ensemble (EE):

A hybrid approach that combines multiple elastic measures like DTW and LCSS.
Distances for Multivariate Time Series
Mahalanobis Distance:

Accounts for correlations between different dimensions in multivariate series.
DTW with Weighted Dimensions:

Extends DTW to multivariate data with dimensional weights.
Principal Component Distance:

Uses dimensionality reduction to compare principal components of the series.
Application-Specific Distances
Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD):

Measures the "cost" of transforming one series into another, often used for histograms or distributions over time.
Cross-Correlation Lag Distance:

Measures dissimilarity after accounting for time lags via cross-correlation.
Path-Based Distance:

Computes the dissimilarity by identifying optimal alignment paths.
Conclusion
The choice of distance measure depends on:

Temporal Alignment: Use elastic methods like DTW or TWED for misaligned series.
Noise Robustness: Consider LCSS, EDR, or wavelet-based distances.
Computational Efficiency: Basic measures like Euclidean or FastDTW are faster but may not capture complex patterns.
